Add docs to data module (#3187)
PennyLaneAI/pennylane: doc/introduction/data.rst

.. role:: html(raw)
   :format: html

.. _intro_ref_data:

Quantum Datasets
================

PennyLane provides the :mod:`~.data` subpackage to download, create, store and manipulate quantum datasets within the PennyLane framework.

Loading Datasets in PennyLane
-----------------------------

> We can access data of a desired type with the :func:`~pennylande.data.load` function. This downloads the desired

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can access data of a desired type with the :func:`~pennylane.data.load` function. This downloads the desired
```

> dataset or loads it from local storage if previously downloaded. Some examples of data categories available for download include 'qchem',

Reviewer 2: Should it be \``"qchem"\`` or something similar?

Author: Yes, exactly! Thanks Soran, I was looking for that formatting. 
This line is gone now, but I will apply this everywhere else that it appears.

> dataset or loads it from local storage if previously downloaded. Some examples of data categories available for download include 'qchem',
> quantum chemistry-related datasets, and 'qspin', spin-system-related datasets. To specify the desired data, we use several arguments.
> For 'qchem' this includes the molname, basis, and bondlength, and for 'qspin' this includes sys_name, periodic, lattice, and layout. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
dataset or loads it from local storage if previously downloaded.

To specify the dataset to be loaded, the data category (``data_type``) must be
specified, alongside category-specific keyword arguments. For the full list
of available datasets, please see the dataset library documentation.
```

Reviewer: @DSGuala a suggestion here to make it more generic, and link back to the QML pages Utkarsh is putting together

Author: Thanks, suggestion committed.

> Ideally, the :func:`~pennylande.data.load` returns a list with the desired data which can then be used within
> the usual PennyLane workflow.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The :func:`~pennylane.data.load` returns a list with the desired data which can then be used within
the usual PennyLane workflow.
```

.. code-block:: python

>     >>> H2_dataset=qml.data.load(data_type='qchem',molname='H2', basis='6-31G', bondlength='0.46')
>     >>> print(H2_dataset)
>     [<pennylane.data.dataset.Dataset object at 0x7f14e4369640>]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    >>> H2_dataset = qml.data.load(data_type="qchem", molname="H2", basis="6-31G", bondlength="0.46")
    >>> print(H2_dataset)
    [<pennylane.data.dataset.Dataset object at 0x7f14e4369640>]
```

Using Datasets in PennyLane
---------------------------

> Once loaded, one can access the attributes in the dataset.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once loaded, one can access properties of the datasets (referred to as _attributes_):
```

.. code-block:: python

    >>> H2_dataset[0].molecule
    <pennylane.qchem.molecule.Molecule object at 0x7f890b409280>
    >>> H2_dataset[0].hf_state
    [1 1 0 0 0 0 0 0]

> The loaded data items are compatible with PennyLane whenever possible. We can therefore
> use them directly in PennyLane workflow as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The loaded data items are fully compatible with PennyLane. We can therefore
use them directly in PennyLane workflow as follows:
```

.. code-block:: python

    >>> dev = qml.device('default.qubit',wires=H2_dataset[0].hamiltonian.wires)
    >>> @qml.qnode(dev)
    ... def circuit():
    ...     return qml.expval(H2_dataset[0].hamiltonian)
    >>> print(circuit())
    2.173913043478261

> 

Reviewer: @DSGuala it might be good to also explain how to know available attributes for different datasets. Either by linking to another page in the documentation, or showing how to do it programmatically (or even better, both!)

Author: Added. 
I would like to link the website from the [qml PR](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/qml/pull/613) for more information about the datasets. But that isn't merged yet.

Dataset Structure
-----------------

> Two example subcategories in PennyLane's quantum dataset subpackage are `qchem` and `qspin`.
> These subcategories offer data relating to molecules and spin systems, respectively. Users can call the 
> :func:`~.pennylane.data.list_datasets` function to get a snapshot of the currently available data.
> This function returns a nested dictionary as we show below. Note that this example limits the results
> of the function calls for clarity and that as more data becomes available, the results of these
> function calls will change.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can call the 
:func:`~.pennylane.data.list_datasets` function to get a snapshot of the currently available data.
This function returns a nested dictionary as we show below. Note that this example limits the results
of the function calls for clarity and that as more data becomes available, the results of these
function calls will change.
```

.. code-block:: python

    >>> available_data = qml.data.list_datasets()
    >>> available_data.keys()
    dict_keys(['qspin', 'qchem'])
    >>> available_data['qchem']
    dict_keys(['H2', 'HeH'])
    >>> available_data['qchem']['H2']
    dict_keys(['6-31G'])
    >>> print(available_data['qchem']['H2']['6-31G'])
    ['0.46', '1.16', '1.22', ...]

> Filtering Datasets

Reviewer 2: I think this is repetitive. We already moved this to the beginning of the doc.

Author: This portion refers to downloading partial datasets, e.g. when a user only wants to download the Hamiltonian and not the molecule of a particular dataset. While the beginning of the doc refers to loading accessing a particular property, e.g. `dataset.hamiltonian`. I will move this part to the beginning to make it more clear though.

------------------

In the case that we only wish to download or load portions of a large dataset, we can specify the desired attributes.

> For example, we can download only the molecule and hamiltonian of a dataset as follows:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For example, we can download only the molecule and Hamiltonian of a dataset as follows:
```

.. code-block:: python

>     >>> H2_hamiltonian = qml.data.load(data_type='qchem',molname='H2', basis='6-31G', bondlength='0.46', attributes=['molecule','hamiltonian'])

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    >>> H2_hamiltonian = qml.data.load(data_type="qchem", molname="H2", basis="6-31G", bondlength="0.46", attributes=["molecule", "hamiltonian"])
```

    >>> H2_hamiltonian
    <Hamiltonian: terms=185, wires=[0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7]>

:html:`<div class="summary-table">`

Quantum Datasets Functions and Classes
--------------------------------------

Classes
^^^^^^^

.. autosummary::
    :nosignatures:

    ~pennylane.data.Dataset    

> :html:`</div>`

Reviewer: @DSGuala how important is it to list `Dataset` in the quickstart? Is it something readers will need to know about? Or are the functions below sufficient? If so, I recommend removing the Classes section

Author: I added a small section on using `Dataset` to write and read datasets to/from disk. So I would like to keep this.

.. role:: html(raw)
   :format: html

.. _intro_ref_data:

> Quantum Datasets

Reviewer 2: Please double check the code examples one more time. Majority of the examples do not work properly.

================

PennyLane provides the :mod:`~.data` subpackage to download, create, store and manipulate quantum datasets within the PennyLane framework.

Loading Datasets in PennyLane
-----------------------------

We can access data of a desired type with the :func:`~pennylane.data.load` function. This downloads the desired
dataset or loads it from local storage if previously downloaded.

To specify the dataset to be loaded, the data category (``data_name``) must be
specified, alongside category-specific keyword arguments. For the full list
of available datasets, please see the dataset library documentation.

> The :func:`~pennylane.data.load` returns a list with the desired data which can then be used within

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The :func:`~pennylane.data.load` function returns a list with the desired data which can then be used within
```

the usual PennyLane workflow.

.. code-block:: python

    >>> H2_dataset = qml.data.load(data_name="qchem", molname="H2", basis="6-31G", bondlength="0.46")
    >>> print(H2_dataset)
    [<pennylane.data.dataset.Dataset object at 0x7f14e4369640>]

When we only want to download portions of a large dataset, we can specify the desired properties  (referred to as _attributes_).
For example, we can download only the molecule and hamiltonian of a dataset as follows:

.. code-block:: python

>     >>> H2_hamiltonian = qml.data.load(data_name='qchem',molname='H2', basis='6-31G', bondlength='0.46', attributes=['molecule','hamiltonian'])

Reviewer 4: We now support bond length as `float`, might want to reflect it here.

Reviewer 4: Also, this would be a list, right? Why aren't we accessing the 0th index and then the Hamiltonian? Or are there any changes to reading specific attributes?

Reviewer 3: we explained the list above, I'd just add `[0]` to the end of this line personally. plus, our users might get into that habit if they are loading one dataset at a time, might as well show the type of stuff we've been doing internally.

Author: No changes, I added the `[0]`

    >>> H2_hamiltonian
    <Hamiltonian: terms=185, wires=[0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7]>

To determine what attributes are available for a type of dataset, we can use the function :func:`~pennylane.data.list_attributes`:

> .. code-block:: python

Reviewer 4: What is this error for at GitHub UI?

Author: I think it's just that `.. code-block::` needs a line break after it :facepalm:

>     >>> qml.data.list_attributes(data_name='qchem')

Reviewer 3: it's technically a positional argument so `data_name=` isn't needed, but this is fine to do anyway.

    ['molecule',
    'hamiltonian',
    'wire_map',
    ...
    'vqe_params',
    'vqe_circuit']

Using Datasets in PennyLane
---------------------------

Once loaded, one can access properties of the datasets (referred to as _attributes_):

.. code-block:: python

    >>> H2_dataset[0].molecule
    <pennylane.qchem.molecule.Molecule object at 0x7f890b409280>
    >>> H2_dataset[0].hf_state
    [1 1 0 0 0 0 0 0]

The loaded data items are fully compatible with PennyLane. We can therefore
use them directly in PennyLane workflow as follows:

.. code-block:: python

    >>> dev = qml.device('default.qubit',wires=H2_dataset[0].hamiltonian.wires)
    >>> @qml.qnode(dev)
    ... def circuit():
    ...     return qml.expval(H2_dataset[0].hamiltonian)
    >>> print(circuit())
    2.173913043478261

Dataset Structure
-----------------

You can call the 
:func:`~.pennylane.data.list_datasets` function to get a snapshot of the currently available data.
This function returns a nested dictionary as we show below. Note that this example limits the results
of the function calls for clarity and that as more data becomes available, the results of these
function calls will change.

> .. code-block:: python

Reviewer 4: Nice!

    >>> available_data = qml.data.list_datasets()
    >>> available_data.keys()
    dict_keys(['qspin', 'qchem'])
    >>> available_data['qchem']
    dict_keys(['H2', 'HeH'])
    >>> available_data['qchem']['H2']

>     dict_keys(['6-31G'])

Reviewer 3: this isn't actual output right? did you ask for `.keys()` locally and not write it in here?

Author: Yup, these lines should have `.keys()` at the end. Will edit.

    >>> print(available_data['qchem']['H2']['6-31G'])
    ['0.46', '1.16', '1.22', ...]

Filtering Datasets
------------------

In the case that we only wish to download or load portions of a large dataset, we can specify the desired attributes.
For example, we can download only the molecule and Hamiltonian of a dataset as follows:

.. code-block:: python

    >>> H2_hamiltonian = qml.data.load(data_type="qchem", molname="H2", basis="6-31G", bondlength="0.46", attributes=["molecule", "hamiltonian"])

>     >>> H2_hamiltonian

Reviewer 4: Same comment as above.

    <Hamiltonian: terms=185, wires=[0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7]>

:html:`<div class="summary-table">`

Creating Custom Datasets
------------------------

The functionality in :mod:`~.data` also includes creating and reading custom-made datasets.
To create a dataset, we can do the following:

.. code-block:: python

    >>> example_hamiltonian = qml.Hamiltonian(coeffs=[1,0.5], observables=[qml.PauliZ(wires=0),qml.PauliX(wires=1)])

>     >>> example_energies, _ = np.linalg.eigh(qml.matrix(example_hamiltonian))

Reviewer 4: It might be nice to add energies as a comment toward the end of the line.

>     >>> example_dataset = qml.data.Dataset(dataset_name = 'An example dataset',hamiltonian=example_hamiltonian,energies=example_energies)

Reviewer 4: It can be just named `demo_dataset` or `example_dataset`.

    >>> example_dataset.dataset_name
    'An example dataset'
    >>> example_dataset.hamiltonian
      (0.5) [X1]
    + (1) [Z0]
    >>> example_dataset.energies
    array([-1.5, -0.5,  0.5,  1.5])

We can then write this :class:`~.data.Dataset` to storage and read it as follows:

.. code-block:: python
    
    >>> example_dataset.write('./path/to/dataset.dat')
    >>> read_dataset = qml.data.Dataset()

>     >>> read_dataset.read('./path/to/dataset.dat')

Reviewer 4: Yes, we should be able to read in one line. Looks weird otherwise.

Reviewer 3: so.. should I add that `from_file` helper function after all?

    >>> read_dataset.dataset_name
    'An example dataset'
    

Quantum Datasets Functions and Classes
--------------------------------------

Classes
^^^^^^^

.. autosummary::
    :nosignatures:

    ~pennylane.data.Dataset    

:html:`</div>`

Functions
^^^^^^^^^

:html:`<div class="summary-table">`

.. autosummary::
    :nosignatures:

    ~pennylane.data.list_datasets

>     ~pennylane.data.load

Reviewer 3: check the latest `data/__init__.py` for an updated list here

Author: > so.. should I add that from_file helper function after all?
@obliviateandsurrender 
I'm okay to keep it like this for now.

Reviewer 3: I was just thinking of load_interactive and list_attributes, but they're random helpers anyway

Author: Yup, I added those to the docs :+1:

================

PennyLane provides the :mod:`~.data` subpackage to download, create, store and manipulate quantum datasets.

Loading Datasets in PennyLane
-----------------------------

We can access data of a desired type with the :func:`~pennylane.data.load` or :func:`~.data.load_interactive` functions.
These download the desired datasets or load them from local storage if previously downloaded. 
Here we use the :func:`~pennylane.data.load` function, for the
:func:`~.data.load_interactive` function, please see the relevant documentation.

To specify the dataset to be loaded, the data category (``data_name``) must be
specified, alongside category-specific keyword arguments. For the full list
of available datasets, please see the dataset library documentation.
The :func:`~pennylane.data.load` function returns a list with the desired data.

.. code-block:: python

    >>> H2_dataset = qml.data.load(data_name="qchem", molname="H2", basis="STO-3G", bondlength="1.0")
    >>> print(H2_dataset)
    [<pennylane.data.dataset.Dataset object at 0x7f14e4369640>]

When we only want to download portions of a large dataset, we can specify the desired properties  (referred to as `attributes`).

> For example, we can download or load only the molecule and hamiltonian of a dataset as follows:

Reviewer 2: Hamiltonian

.. code-block:: python

    >>> H2_partial = qml.data.load(data_name='qchem',molname='H2', basis='STO-3G', bondlength=1.0, attributes=['molecule','fci_energy'])[0]
    >>> H2_partial.molecule
    <pennylane.qchem.molecule.Molecule at 0x7f56c9d78e50>
    >>> H2_partial.fci_energy
    -1.1011498981604342

To determine what attributes are available for a type of dataset, we can use the function :func:`~pennylane.data.list_attributes`:

.. code-block:: python

    >>> qml.data.list_attributes(data_name='qchem')
    ['molecule',
    'hamiltonian',
    'wire_map',
    ...
    'vqe_params',
    'vqe_circuit']

Using Datasets in PennyLane
---------------------------

> Once loaded, one can access properties of the datasets (referred to as _attributes_):

Reviewer 2: _attributes_ does not render correctly.

.. code-block:: python

    >>> H2_dataset[0].molecule
    <pennylane.qchem.molecule.Molecule object at 0x7f890b409280>
    >>> print(H2_dataset[0].hf_state)

>     [1 1 0 0]

Reviewer: Note: this is technically _not_ `python` syntax, but `pycon` syntax, so you should change this (and other examples) to

```rest
.. code-block:: pycon
```

_However_, the nice thing about ReST is that it recognizes pycon syntax automatically! So you don't even need to use `.. code-block::` and indent.

For example:

```rest
Once loaded, one can access properties of the datasets:

>>> H2_dataset[0].molecule
<pennylane.qchem.molecule.Molecule object at 0x7f890b409280>
>>> print(H2_dataset[0].hf_state)
[1 1 0 0]
```
